- This is the world's strongest magnet,
capable of sucking objects in,
generating electric current.
Can you see that?
And levitating non-magnetic objects.
It even wreaks havoc on camera equipment.
- Wire is magnetic!
- So if it's a CMOS sensor,
the electrons just can't find their way.
- Well, they get redirected.
- So yeah, if you notice
bad video or audio,
know that it's incredibly hard
to shoot in these magnetic fields.
A portion of this video
was sponsored by Google.
I came to the National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory
in Tallahassee, Florida,
where since the year 2000,
they have held the Guinness World Record
for the strongest
continuous magnetic field.
- Somebody left a chair where
it wasn't supposed to be.
It then got accelerated across the cell,
completely pulled the
guts out of the chair.
Now we all have those
nice, super uncomfortable,
wooden chairs.
- For reference, the magnetic field
of the Earth is 0.00005 Tesla.
A fridge magnet is around 0.01 Tesla.
MRI machines can get up to three Tesla.
But this electromagnet creates
a magnetic field of 45 Tesla,
so nearly a million times
Earth's magnetic field.
To achieve this field, the magnet consists
of an outer superconducting magnet
and an inner resistive magnet.
I'll explain why you need
both types in a moment.
The apparatus is two stories tall,
but the maximum field,
or field center, only occurs in the center
of a narrow cylinder that
runs through the middle.
- Right now it's off.
- Is it?
- [Tim] There's no magnet.
- Can I put my finger in the bore?
Is that a bad idea?
- No, it's fine.
You can totally do that.
- I'm gonna see. Oh.
So that's where there's 45 Tesla.
- Further down.
A meter away from that.
- A meter down.
And so that just drops down
for a couple meters?
- It's clear all the way
through to the bottom.
- Oh wow.
- The maximum field is
basically a centimeter tall.
- Yeah.
- Here we have
very small samples.
Think something like a chip
in a computer or a cell phone.
That's what users will come in with.
So that's plenty big
for what we want to do
with material science or
kinetic matter research.
- Since we can't see or film in the center
of the magnet, we're going to experiment
with the magnetic field that extends above
and around the magnet on this platform.
So the magnet's over there?
- Yes.
- But the magnetic field
extends all the way out here.
- Yes.
- And past.
This is known as the fringe field,
and although it's much
weaker than 45 Tesla,
it is still plenty dangerous.
- For a superconducting magnet,
it depends on the size of that bore.
So the bigger the bore, the
larger the fringe field,
because the magnetic flux does
not penetrate the windings.
And you have to form a complete loop.
So those loops just move further
and further and further
out to make that field.
So this is the 100 Gauss
line for the fringe field.
- So what happens to objects
around the 100 Gauss line?
- Things with shapes will
start orienting themselves
to the field.
So if you have it sitting on a tabletop,
say over here, it will
start pivoting on its own.
And if you get it too much
closer, it will just go.
And by the time you notice it's moving,
it's already too late.
Meaning, no ferromagnetic objects
within the 100 Gauss line.
If you have anything ferromagnetic on you,
any implants that are metallic.
Pacemaker? Anybody?
Anybody? Anybody? Okay.
- Ramping up this magnet to full power
takes around an hour and a half.
That's because they
have to put 47,000 amps
of current into the outer
superconducting electromagnet.
47,000 amps.
- 47,000 amps, 500 volts.
- It is so insane.
- [Tim] All right, so let's
take it all the way up
to full field.
- One thing that happens
in a strong magnetic field, obviously,
is that magnetic materials
are attracted to it.
We cut open a Nerf football
and put in a couple steel
washers being careful
to tape it up so the
washers can't get out.
We also covered the opening to the magnet
so the ball won't get sucked down into it.
I got an unmodified Nerf football.
And sure enough,
it's easy to tell which
ball contains the washers.
I tried to throw the football
and hit the side of the magnet.
Okay.
After a few misses.
No! Are you kidding me?
No.
- No.
- It bounced around and stuck.
It should have looked more like this.
Another thing to do if
you have a strong magnet
is get ferrofluid fluid.
Ferrofluid fluid contains
nanoscale pieces of magnetite,
that's an iron containing mineral,
and they're suspended in solution
coded in surfactants so they
don't all clump together.
But in an external magnetic field,
they all line up like iron
filings around a bar magnet.
This ferrofluid fluid started
to develop parallel ridges
even meters away from the magnet.
And as we got closer, spikes
formed on the surface,
aligning the magnetite
particles with the field.
Closer still and the ferrofluid
fluid climbed up the side
of the vessel.
- [Tim] So it's not much,
but it's just kind of a.
- A little bit of a tug?
- [Tim] Yep, and then
try and tilt it away,
and then you'll feel the difference.
- Oh yeah.
It definitely preferentially
wants to come this way.
Magnetite is actually the
mineral that led people
to discover the phenomenon of
magnetism in the first place.
At least 3000 years ago,
naturally magnetized pieces
of magnetite were found
in a part of Greece called Magnesia.
That's actually where the
word magnet comes from.
In Greek, they were called
stones from magnesia
but they were also
referred to as lodestones.
And it was discovered
that lodestones could attract
each other or pieces of iron.
And by the 11th century
in China, it was realized
that magnets could be used
to make a compass needle
that would always point
in the same direction.
The side that pointed to the north
of the earth was referred
to as a north seeking pole.
And the other side,
the south seeking pole.
Though these days we
often just say North Pole
and South Pole of the magnet.
But why are only some materials magnetic?
Electrons are essentially tiny magnets,
but in most atoms, they are paired up,
one pointing one way
and the other pointing the opposite way.
So their fields cancel out.
In elements with half full
outer shells of electrons,
well, then they can't pair up.
So atoms have magnetic fields.
But if neighboring atoms aren't aligned,
well then, the magnetic fields
of all the atoms cancel out
and the bulk material is non-magnetic.
But even if you get all these
atoms aligning in one part
of the material, known as a domain,
they may be aligned opposite
atoms in other domains
and cancel out.
So you need all the domains to be aligned.
Normally when you see these,
they're really strong magnets.
But not here and not yet.
And this can be done by applying
a strong external magnetic field.
So right now, these are not magnetic.
They do not stick to each other.
But he is loading them in there,
into the Helmholtz coil.
- See the machine here?
- Whoa!
And then you get a permanent magnet.
Materials that meet these
criteria are called ferromagnetic.
After iron, the most
common magnetic element.
But nickel and cobalt are
also ferromagnetic magnetic.
In the powerful magnetic field
around the world's strongest magnet,
what is even more surprising
to see is the behavior
of non-ferromagnetic materials.
Here we have four sheets
of different materials.
Two different types of
plastic, copper, and aluminum.
When they are stationary in the field,
there's no difference between them.
But when they move.
- Two, one, drop!
- Materials that conduct
electricity fall a lot slower.
(gentle upbeat music)
I'll get into that.
But first, this portion of the video
was sponsored by Google
and they were interested in this video
because it's all about magnets,
which are core to our future.
Electric vehicles, for example,
use electric motors, which
need magnets to work.
And US search interest
for electric vehicle
reached an all-time high
in the last 12 months.
That is, according to Google Trends,
a tool that allows you to see
what people are searching for.
The thing that connects
these trending searches
and many others, is that
people are trying to find ways
of doing things that are less
destructive to the planet.
And Google is like, "We
live on this planet too.
We also wanna do that."
In fact, Google has matched 100%
of their electricity use with
renewable energy since 2017.
They also run Project Sunroof,
which helps people
decide if solar is right
for their home by
providing Google Maps data
to create a 3D model of your roof
and estimate energy
savings from rooftop solar.
Personally, I'm just happy to learn
that people are searching
for things related
to sustainability and that
Google has made a real commitment
to sustainability, too.
You can learn more about sustainability
and Google's efforts at
sustainability.google.
So thanks to Google for
sponsoring that part of my video.
And now, back to magnets.
What's happening is that,
as the metal plate is
falling through the field,
the number of magnetic field lines
passing through it is changing.
This change in magnetic flux
induces electric currents,
called eddy currents in the plate,
which create their own magnetic field
that opposes the change in the flux.
This is known as Lenz's Law.
So if the plate is falling
towards a north magnetic pole,
the induced currents create a
north magnetic pole themselves
so that the plate is repelled
and so it falls much slower.
So as that big plate falls,
there are eddy currents
generated in the metal,
which should dissipate
some energy as heat.
So I wanna see if we can see that.
- [Tim] It's actually slowing down now.
'Cause it's in a much higher field
- Now it is slight,
but I think you can see
that the plate is warming
up a bit as it falls.
Previously, I visited an
electromagnetic levitator
at the Palace of Discovery in Paris.
Whoa!
It uses an alternating
current to levitate a plate,
but the eddy currents in that plate
generate so much heat
that water actually boils
on its surface.
Check out how hot this plate is.
I like to think of Lenz's
Law as the "No You Don't" Law
because whatever you try to
do, nature acts to oppose you.
- There you go.
- Ah!
If the plate is falling,
eddy currents are induced
to slow its dissent.
Look at it! (laughs)
But if you try to pick up the plate.
(laughs) Come on!
Nature also says, "No, you don't."
In this case, a south
magnetic pole is induced
under the plate, attracting
it back to the magnet.
They don't know if I'm weak
or if this is actually insanely difficult.
Ah, ah.
Oh.
- There you go.
- Oh my goodness.
- You're strong like bull.
- Whoa.
No matter how hard I tried
to push the plate down,
it just wouldn't go very fast.
Because even if I could
speed it up a little bit,
that would increase the
rate of change of flux,
and hence the induced currents
and their associated magnetic field.
That is ridiculous.
It's so weird.
We tried a number of other conductive,
but non-magnetic objects,
around the magnet,
like this thick cylinder of aluminum.
Drop it straight on the
magnet and nature says,
"No you don't."
Try to roll it across
the top. No you don't.
It just refuses to roll.
We wrapped up a volleyball
in aluminum foil
and passed it across the magnet.
Or dropped it straight in.
Again, the changing magnetic
flux induces eddy currents
that produce their own magnetic field
to oppose the original change in flux.
We wanted to see just how much
deceleration the fringe field
of the 45 Tesla magnet could achieve.
So we decided to fire projectiles
from a potato cannon across the top.
- You ready?
- All right, we're ready.
- Three, two, one.
(metal clanks)
Heads!
- This is what the projectile looked like
with the magnetic field off.
And this is what it looked like
with the magnetic field on.
If we compare the two shots, you can see
that as the projectile
enters the magnetic field,
the induced eddy currents
rotate the projectile.
So it remains oriented along
the magnetic field lines.
And this minimizes the change in flux
that's experienced by the projectile.
- [Operator] Three, two, one.
- Now, some of the
projectiles contained coils
of wire that were connected to LEDs.
- So the LEDs are actually
biased opposite polarity.
So no matter which direction
the field is coming in,
one of them will be lit.
And we're hoping that as
it crosses through a field,
you'll see the change in color of LED
of the nose cone.
- Mar And sure enough,
these projectiles light up,
showing how the induced currents
are changing in the coil.
(gentle music)
You know, in all these cases
the induced electric energy is dissipated,
either as light or heat.
But what if you had a material
that didn't dissipate energy,
like a superconductor below
its critical temperature?
There are two important things to know
about the high temperature
superconductor we're using here.
First, below its critical temperature,
most of the material has
zero electrical resistance,
which means, if you bring
a magnet close to it,
currents will be induced to
oppose the change in flux.
And since it's a superconductor,
those currents can persist indefinitely
and expel all of the magnetic field.
Second, there are some
filaments through the material
that are not superconducting.
- There's defects that are engineered
into the superconductors,
a second phase that traps
those magnetic field lines
and keeps them from moving.
It can no longer rise or fall
because it's kind of locked in
that magnetic configuration.
- This is the human levitator.
It consists of a 90 pound,
or 40 kilogram, magnet,
hovering above a ring of superconductors.
So I'm standing at the magnet,
and underneath is the superconductor?
- That's right.
- When I stand on the magnet,
it is pressed down into
the superconductors.
But the increase in magnetic
flux is opposed by currents
in the superconductors
creating a magnetic field
that repels the magnetic field
from the magnet I'm standing on.
Maintain my angular moment.
Oh yeah.
So I remain levitating
above the superconductors.
- [Speaker] I also brought a leaf blower,
if you wanna hold on that, turn it on.
- For real?
(group laughs)
- It's up to you.
- Let's get it.
(leaf blower whirs)
Now, there's another way to
levitate in a magnetic field
that has nothing to do
with induced eddy currents.
And it's all because
all materials actually
have magnetic properties.
They're just hard to see
unless a strong magnetic field is present.
Some materials are always
attracted to magnetic fields.
They display what's called para magnetism.
Oxygen is like this.
- We have liquid oxygen
dripping off the bottom here,
and it gets attracted to the magnet.
It doesn't matter if it's a north
or south magnetic pole,
the presence of the external
field causes the magnetic field
of material to strengthen
the overall magnetic field.
And that causes attraction.
Other materials, in fact,
most materials are repelled
by a strong enough magnetic
field, either north or south.
And this is known as diamagnetism.
Water is a good example of this.
In the presence of the external field,
the water molecules become
opposing magnets effectively.
And so they are repelled.
So here you can see how
bringing a magnet close
to the surface of water creates an indent.
You can use this repulsion
in a strong enough magnetic field
to levitate objects you
ordinarily wouldn't think
of as magnetic.
Here we're using a slightly
weaker 31 Tesla magnet
so that we can use a periscope setup
to actually see into the bore.
And our camera is there.
- So as soon as you are
on this optical way,
you should be able to put everything down.
- Wonderful.
This strawberry will be magnetic
in a strong enough field.
- Well, it's diamagnetic right now.
It's just we're not in
a strong enough field.
- Right.
- Yeah.
- For us to see anything.
- Mm hmm. Correct.
Because of the water.
- Right.
- Water is diamagnetic
and there's a lot of
water in strawberries.
- Oh, that's nice.
Oh, that's beautiful.
Yeah, it's beautiful.
And the same occurs with a raspberry
or a little piece of plastic pizza.
Living organisms contain enough water
that they too can be levitated.
They wouldn't do it here at the mag lab
but people have levitated frogs.
- Oh!
- Yep, this is it!
Yep, there you go.
- No way!
- And grasshoppers?
Even mice in experiments meant
to help understand the
effects of weightlessness
without having to go into space.
So are very strong magnetic
fields safe for living things?
- There are no lasting effects,
there are no long-term effects.
But we have noticed that
there is the possibility
of actually polarizing the
stones that are in the inner ear.
And the effect that that has on the rodent
is that the rodent actually spins.
- Like they go in circles?
- They go in circles.
It doesn't last for very long.
It's only a few minutes
after the animal comes out
of the magnet.
- So how do you actually make
the world's strongest magnet?
Contrary to what I expected,
you can't do it just with
superconducting magnets alone.
- The highest magnetic
field you could generate
with superconducting wire
was nominally 20 Tesla.
- That's because
superconductors have a limit
to the amount of magnetic
field they can withstand
before they're no longer superconducting.
So the solution is to combine an outer
superconducting electromagnet
with an inner electromagnet
made of ordinary wire.
- So the blue, green,
and salmon colored bits,
that's the superconducting outsert.
That produces 11.5 Tesla.
Inside of that, we put a resistive magnet
that produces 33 and a half Tesla.
Maxwell's equations, fields
add, we get 45 Tesla.
- But making high field magnets
with ordinary resistive
wire is really hard
- For a wire wound magnet,
like a junkyard magnet,
a traditional electromagnet,
the highest magnetic field you
can get is about two Tesla.
And the reason is that
you cannot get the heat
out of the innermost windings.
So back in the 1950s,
Francis Bitter, up at MIT,
he realized that physics doesn't care
what shape the conductor is.
You can take your round wire
and smash it into a very thin plate.
If you then stack those plates
with alternating insulators,
you make a helix, that
electrically looks just like that.
But now I can push cooling water axially
through the stack of conductor.
So that means that innermost part,
I can now pull all that heat away,
which means I can go to
much, much, much, much,
much higher currents through these coils
up to 57,000 amps than what you can do
with a traditional wire
round electromagnet.
- And that gives you 34 Tesla, that?
- That gives you 33.5,
but it's stacked up.
So we stack all of these
up in a stacking jig.
They're aligned up with tie rods.
We then put about 20 tons of force on it
and then lock those tie rods down
and that holds the coil together
and it gives us our electrical
connection between each turn.
And we're pushing, you know,
several thousand gallons per minute
of deionized water through
those coils to keep them cold
'cause otherwise it melts and you're done.
Occasionally you get material failure
that happens when the material
goes past its plastic limit
and starts flexing either
into the coil next to it
or maybe even shorting to ground.
And this is what happened here.
The coil plastically failed,
meaning the metal went beyond
its springy characteristics,
where it would come back,
and it just completely deformed,
which drove it into the coil next to it,
burned through the insulator,
and then vaporized all of this metal.
And you can see more on the inside.
It killed this coil, which is the B coil.
But because it failed on the inner edge,
it killed the A coil.
Failed on the outer edge,
it also killed the C coil.
So that was an expensive failure.
- Expensive failure.
- Yeah. Yeah.
The record is the highest
continuous magnetic field
in the world, period.
China recently commissioned
their 45 Tesla hybrid,
very similar in concept to ours.
So now there's two of them in the world.
- Running the strongest
magnets on the planet
takes a lot of energy.
The Mag Lab uses a significant fraction
of Tallahassee's electricity.
- So we can consume with
all four power supplies
at full blast about 8% of their
total generating capacity.
- What's the electricity
budget of this place?
- So nominal $250 to $300,000 a month.
- Holy, yeah, that's a lot.
- Yeah.
So we operate in their
federally mandated reserve,
which every utility has to have.
They have to have that available
to push into the grid
if there's a problem.
We have a deal set up with the city
so that they can actually
make money off that power
that they have to produce,
but which they can't sell.
The flip side is, when
they need it, we ramp down,
and we can go down much faster
than they can spin up a Genny.
- Why do you need 45 Tesla?
- There are a couple things
that drive material discovery.
One of them is just
growing a new material.
The other one is putting it
in an extreme environment,
like high magnetic field,
high electric field, high pressure,
ultra low temperature.
- Low temperature.
- Another axis is taking
an existing material
and improving its cleanliness.
So getting all the impurities out.
So as you drop the
impurities in the material,
you're reducing where the
electrons scatter from in there.
And that improves the properties,
enables you to see things
that you were never able
to see before.
We've only just barely
scratched the surface
on what can be done with this.
People are gonna look back
about 25 years from now
and this will be the inflection point,
this five year period.